An Argument that Carteisanism is Zeigteist in the Computational Society
=========
We might even say that this shift to a dualist Cartesian notion itself is reactionary to the onslaught of computing phenomenological decisions in the conduct of our social lives, just as postmodernity and pragmatism was reactionary to authoritarian violence. It might still be argued as 'Zeigteist'. (William James vocally oppossed Cartesianism Refer https://journals.openedition.org/ejpap/415, A Critique of Rorty’s Conception of Pragmatism
Paul Giladi). Here James had argued the incompleteness of the system of metaphysics in cartesiansim, while that it precisely what we appreciate. The incompletness combined with rational abstract consistency, allows a unification of ideals among different people, while they can then be charitable in redistributing wealth as well as seek redemption in romantic contemplation in faith, both of which are required for completing life, which we say is not be governed by any monistic philosophy such as pragmatism.
References:
To reject metaphysics is metaphysics (Pierce as discussed in Giladi).We must philosophise, said the great naturalist Aristotle – if only to avoid philosophising. (CP: 1.129)



The nature of Intelligence:
1. Intelligence is the ability to survive. It is a feature that allows an organism to survive in the planet and it is never superfluous. It is strictly what is needed for the job of survival. That is the reason why we do not identify intelligence with complexity -  A complex weather phenomenon, even ones that are longlived enough to be considered alive (such as storms on jupiter) could not be considered alive. Likewise a highly complicated mechanical system might not be considered intelligent, even if even appreciating its complexity cursorily is difficult (admittedly it might be capable of understanding by effort). Hence intelligence might be identified with life itself.
2. An organism is identified by its form, its appendages and generally its spatial existence. Intelligence with respect to an organism is expressed when it responds to stimuli from outside world. This adaptive response to signals from the environment is an important aspect of intelligence. Thereafter the organism seeks to protect itself from the environment, in that it attempts to grow - which might be in the nature of protecting itself from corrosive elements or seeking elements that could cumulate to its biomass. Say a very simple worm burrows down when the sun gets hot, it is actually acting in response to certain events produced in the environment by seeking comfort and avoiding pain. 
3. But there is another interesting aspect to intelligence. Apart from simply seeking pleasure or good (in Platonic terms), it sometimes seeks the bad. Thus let us say an organism is soaked in a sugary solution, there exists a point where the organism actually wants to experiment the saline solution considered corrossive. This might have been by the propogation of spores or probing with appendages, but we might see in many cases an inverted behaviour of experimentation, in search of better goodness, closer to the ideal. That is to say, we might account for these behaviours by a mathematical formulation wherein the organism has an internal memory which is an open ordered set of good things. Hence the organism ranks its experiences from good to bad and seeks to expand this continously.
4. Thus, the organisms internal memory is constantly programmed by events being generated in the real world, which we might not be inaccurate to consider as a giant computer. Nature or earth itself is able to produce a great deal of paralellized events and it had taken four billion years of such events to allow the organism to get the best set of goodness. In fact many versions exist, we will come to that in due course. What is to be remembered is the great amount of computing effort that had gone into the production or incubation of the organisms evolutionary tree. One might see that some of the events on the earth had been catastrophic, but they might all be very well conjectured to the strategies of adversarial event generation in a generally hostile environment with an uncertain strategy. The earth itself is an open system with the universe and hence it might be the universal computer in action.
5. As the evolutionary tree progresses, in each stage an organism is faced with an universal dilemma, that is the dilemma as to whether to expand and search for something new in terms of rewards (or disprove the pain source) or to consolidate its existing position. This dilemma is reflected in our partisan political drama as well, despite the epochial ontological seperation. This dilemma is addressed from time to time in the course of living.The enterprise of political conservatism is not regressive, but a consolidation of existing positions while that of the left is porgressive.
6.It is also important to note the universal thread running across life and intelligence. It is a popular ontological expression to quote the inability to know how it is to be a bat. In fact it is not that formidable a problem (say as against imagining a stick with only one end). It is possible to see that a bat, or for that matter, even a tiny bacterium is alive by its behaviour (its expression) in an empathic manner in response to pain or in appreciation of pleasure. Thus, we had in art had often been having bats and other animal characters in children fiction.
7. Hence, the dilemma of consolidation verus progression is presented universally and this had been in evolution observed as the competition between subjective knowledge that causes defection (or a random dispersion) and thus crossing over into an isolated territory of greater privilage causing divergence of species. This high degree of variance and subjectivity of this dilemma had been instrumental in generating macroscopic phenomena. That is to say emergent consciousness arises from multiple agents attempting to stay together and thus be equal or to seek their own understanding of the environmental rewards and pain (thus at their liberty) and seek to get a better deal and spawn a new evolutionary pathway. This kind of tension that exists among living creatures and the universal dilemma over regrets of missed opportunity, powers macroscopic emergent phenomena of intelligence. This is particularly well reflected in multicellularity. There had been a consolidation of common knowledge in the central nervous system with the surrender of local agency. We might see that eventhough there is an unicellular origin of the organism, subsequent differential expression of genes for tissue specialization, effectively creates agencies that might be adversarial or orthogonal and the emergent confluence of rules of the game might have been the conscious intelligence of multicellular creatures. Even here the defection is handled in a graceful and controlled manner, as with germ cell defection (see C.Extavour).
8. The ability of emergent agencies to produce intelligence might give us clue to the direction of future intelligence. But before that we need to more precisely distinguish natural and artificial intelligence. Given that we see that the emergence is caused by paralell programming over billions of years, we ought to see that intelligence is a hard won phenomenon. We might however be lead to think that it is Markovian given the concise way in which it could be encoded in the forty eight chromosomes of human genome. We might also see that the different brances of evolution are essentially independent and despite the practical dependency on the biome for human survival, it is not theoretically required and hence we might argue that the human state is Markovian in the development of intelligence and it could hence be created without so lengthy a history.
9. However, one needs to elaborate on the nature of senses and perception and expression in order to reflect better. When it comes to intelligence, there is primary attention concerning the prefrontal cortical processing and the inputs by well defined senses. But there exist senses that are deeply embedded in our systems, which give rise to signals and trigger behaviour which is not encoded in the rational faculties. It might be a feeling of being fully fed or hungry. These might trigger specific enzymatic pathways at the cellular level, bubbling up to produce complex influence on preferences and biases at the CNS level. All these are parochial and relate to our legacy of millions of years.
10. In more visible terms, we handle this heritage by expressions that involve our fellow people. A smile means something, that could be inferred from certain learned behaviour, but deeper and more influentially it has roots to our, say five million year past of percieving facial reactions and perhaps a billion year past in appreciating symmetries. Even though the argument of Markovian nature of intelligence might be tenable, the selection of individual traits are from an extended sample of a billion year temporal and millions of units of spatial surface. The cumulative effect of all this parochiality and heritage to our 'gut' intelligence is figured out in the concept of culture. A smile in a market place has so much meaning encoded to it, that reflects back to our microbial past. That is why culture is considered a highly loaded word in english language. Likewise when Turing figured out a test for intelligence, he did not postulate it such that a computer that is capable of answering factual or logical questions that could match a certain category of person to be truly intelligent, but rather said that a computer should be able to fool a person to thinking it is infact a person. Now this is a cultural factor and this parochiality is what Turing cleverly and concisely put into his test.
11. Hence we might say intelligence of an artificial nature is in any case shallow and sparse than natural intelligence (unless a cheap universal simulator is found). We might however look forward to intelligence that can simulate human intelligence to a certain extent, as Turing expected. This is captured in the idea of weak artificial intelligence.
--
Goal based intelligence:
1. In case if we do not express a given goal as derived from the survivalist goal and the dilemma of consolidation (could be in philosophy extended into the existential dilemma, the political dilemma of equality vs liberty and so on), then it might be a  narrow goal. A system that attempts to solve such problems might also be called intelligent in a limited sense.
2. If we start with the assumption that universal apriori truths are not perceptible directly. They exist in fact, but due to the work involved in accessing them, that is the reliance on phenomena to access the neumenological truths, distorts them. This is due to the fact that the work involved is difficult of estimation and the reward seeking behaviour of the expressing agent naturally distorts the truth. Hence, we might say context free truths are not useful. This axiom could be extended to mean that there does not exist a finite set of truths which could be mapped to a finite set of contexts in the form of truth table does not exist as well. Hence, all that we have is belief.
3. We might intuitively say that in that beliefs in that they are biased, might be surmized that they intend to point to the universal and natural truths when a large number of active agents attempt to frame and promote their beliefs. Hence, a critical frame is important to make sure the beliefs are as close as possible to realist truths. The development of a belief propogation network, wherein beliefs are simultaneously propogated along multiple alternate pathways to result not in a binary decision, but a shape of a joint probability distribution is hence a good step in emulating intelligence for narrow goals. The directedness and acyclicity of the graph is a requirement in Bayesian theory. However, reflexivity and revisioning of past evidences either from an impact of the organism or by paralell test moves is closer to the real world. Thus, a system of agents could only produce intelligent perception of an environment. How this happens in unicellular adversarial search (or game rule emergence) might be further inquired.
4.In case where a realist model could be approximated apriori rather than constructed a posteriori (in which case we assume that the emergent rule system corresponds with the universal Lyopunov attractor which represents the truth). The concept of aposteriori truth is captured in such expressions as truth alone triumps, where truth is seen to be animating and representing the telos or ultimate stable state of a system irrespective of initial conditions and storng perturbations. 
5. A causal model preponders a system of unified connected completely like components (quantifiable assortments of finite set of components) each of which could be expressed either as scaled versions of the other or aggregations of others. There is a notion of observer and frame of observation where the components interact to produce quantifiable results of the singular quality in the pursuit of the observer. This could be framed as an equation such as (ax+by+.. =n). A system of equations of polynomials reduces algebrically the world capable of being perturbed arbitrarily and observed for outcomes. Notions of system of equations denote incomplete systems which are represented by finite observations and with a knowledge of required conditions (constrains) could be optimized to produce sufficient conditions for a certain outcome. Smoothness and continuity are essential for the causal model to operate, allowing the calculus of infinitesmals to be able to represent the system coherently in a rationally accessible manner.
6. Metaphysics had dealt with the merits of apriori assumptions and that of a posteriori reflection. There had also been movements that question the necessity of metaphysics itself. This had been the case with pragmatists. Some of the pragmatic movements themselves, such as with Rorty had been criticized to be dogmatic constructing its own metaphysics (Giladi and others). If we look at pragmatism as a metaphysical stance, we see that the dilemma of existence itself is called into question. All the apprehensions and anxieties in the world over regret of missed rewarding opportunities are constructed in this metaphysics to have been introduced by philosophical ruminations, metaphysical rants and power structures which tend to harvest such inadequecies and anxieties. Postmodernity in fact proposes to reject any authority, including appeal to reason itself. Hence, metaphysics itself had been criticized in favour of systems where whatever the truths be, they are embraced as being completely historic with no element of possible ergodism to them.
7. The assertion that there is no apriori reality allowing an observational frame of reference divests  rigour and custodians of truth of power in the social domain. The rejection of universal attractors of aposteriori truth, rejects any pattern to history, of any narratives from history. It lets history be what it is. The complete historicity of intelligence likewise also disallows the asymptotic convergence of natural and artificial emergence. But we see that the question of existence of either of these frameworks of reflection is concerned with the question of whether evolution is to be regulated.
8. The most interesting domain of evolution as of now is social evolution. The society had been discussed as being a spontaneously evolving system in vanguard literature. Hence, the question of whether there is a need for metaphysics is to be evaluated with respect to the pragmatism of control of an evolving society. The real pragmatism (such as with Pierce) is not a dogmatic rejection of metaphysics but it is a question of optimal choice of control. In that the most domiant question of the consolidation dilemma is social today, given wars, economic slowdowns, pogroms and pandemics and the choice of progression of science all concern social decisions, public opinion and policy, the fundamental question of metaphysics might be one as to whether there is a need for an objective observation, either from a regultory point of view (as with Durkheim) or in terms of emergent markets requiring nudges (Hayek). In art, the rejection of metaphysical anxiety had in fact produced some heartwarming tales of happy go luck heroes and the age of innocence. Theology suggests the movement towards such points of renunication of anxiety (as with the Alexandrian school). It is also the concept of redemption from the human condition, wherein the dilemma is rejected at last, so that one is able to do the right thing and attain the highest possible moral state.
9. Thus, we might speculate that there exists a sentiment where there is a fear of going down the wrong road. The presence of such sentiment ontologically, introduces a need to collectively speculate on the control of the organism of the society, as projected from the individual dilemma. 10. Social constitutions in their most stable states are the most peaceful. Desirousness of certain state for any coherent intelligent unit (which at this point is the entire humanity) would need control, either by external coordination and allowing an emergent coordination as with markets.  Even in the latter case, there is need to visit redundancies and needless oscillations. Thus in the true sense of pragmatism, we maintain an ambivalence, as to whether apriori truths exist or not, but we need to take a stance that would be reactive to specific drift directions, constituted by specific beliefs ascending the role of absolute truth, both by the weight of authority or by feedback loops. 
11. Hence it is with response to the specific phenomenon of sociological integration in the present moment of history, that prompts us to adapt a particular stance towards control and collective reflection. There does seem to be a specific dogmatism to postmodernism that explicitly guards against metaphysical reflection. Secondly, the development of the electronic computer dwells exclusively on the phenomenological world, in that events are generated as  proxy to the universal phenomenological events and adapted out to feed onto event mapping agents, who work with various degrees of autonomy. 
12.The autonomy of computing systems are reflected in the time parameter to their functional expression, implicitly introduced by the open ended 'while' loop in the FSM model as it works over networks to produce results that are unpredictable to a good degree, making them difficult of appreciation and hence coordinated control. The proxying of events which is then funneled to intelligent agents might result in emergent collective intelligence which would favour extending the bounds of experiential set of life itself, a higher consciousness at the level of the society. This is probably the path of artificial intelligence in the future and in our opinion it is historically unprecedented due to which the most pragmatic course would be to revert to the notion of apriori truths of the early modernists. 
13.This would likely allow construction of coordinated control, so that computing could be interpreted not as emergent intelligence, but be capable of answering the query of an individual to the strengthening of his liberty.
14. Hence, this might be a construction towards self determination of human agencies and the telological nature of convergent redemption as being asymptotically far away, yet accessible by romanticism and spiritualism in the sense of yearning. The yearning itself might be redemptive and hence might reject concrete effort to realize the ultimate path. This would mean a consolidation of present position, using a criticism of emergent clouds. The emergence of automaton agents which do not explain to individual queries, might not be superintelligent. They might simply contribute to the emergence of a collective system of intelligence, which is akin to multicellularity. Metaphysics of modernism allows the enlightenment of the primacy of reasoning to deter such progression.
15. The computational conception of decisions is essentially normative, tending to embrace what is normal and rejecting the interesting cases as being irrelevant. That is to say, profoundness is sceptically viewed and ignored. On the other hand, control is dependent on making rules about extremes and leaving the normal out of the public sphere. There is a reward of extreme accomplishments and penalization of extreme transregressions, as for the wide band of normalcy, people are expected to negotiate and reflect as libertarian beings. In a computational network taking decisive direction (rather than cancelling out noise) on the course of evolution of the society itself, we might see the rejection of extremes to be impeding the development of theories by supplying missing pieces, which would come back to promote normative goals. Thus, there is low latency in normative realizaiton in the system, leading to an evolving system that does not plan and hence does not control. 
16. Thus, it is essentially a destruction of planning and construction of ideals expressible as hope culturally. It arose paradoxically from the establishment of inclusiveness and equality around globalization, civil rights of the late twentieth century (network theory of Castells).
